+++
author = "Dr Subhadeep Ray"
author_bio = ""
bangla = false
biography_image = ""
biography_image_webp = ""
chapter = true
date = 2021-07-24T18:30:00Z
description = ""
featured = false
image = ""
image_webp = ""
index = 1
next = true
previous = false
tags = []
title = "Episode I: Bengali avant garde movement "

+++
Jagadish Gupta, born as Jagadishchandra Sengupta (1886-1957), belongs to that rare of group of artists, whose unconventional and pioneering roles in changing the course of literary and cultural tradition have contributed to a sort of uneasiness in respect of the public reception of their works. A key figure in the transformation of Bengali literature from the nineteenth century romantic realism to the inter-Wars modernism, Gupta introduced a new kind of fictional narrative, whose skills were appreciated, with a sense of ‘shock’ regarding its content, by Rabindranath Tagore himself. Mainly a suburban writer with middle and lower-middle class life-style, although publishing in the leading periodicals of Kolkata, Gupta can be seen as an exceptional artist in many terms. As articulated by another architect of the Bengali modernist literature Premendra Mitra (1904-88), in his introduction to Gupta’s novel _Kālankita Tirtha_ (_The Disgraced Pilgrimage_), Gupta’s contemporary period never treated him with the kind of respectful attention that his works deserved. And Mitra correctly presumed that there was no certainty that the future reader would rectify this ignorance. Although little remembered and mostly overshadowed by three Bandyopadhyays – Bibhutibhusan (1894-1950), Tarashankar (1898-1971) and Manik (1908-1956) – and even his junior artists, Jagadish Gupta represents a very complex era of Bengali culture establishing its interconnection with the aesthetics of global modernity and preparing the ground for postcolonial art.

Characterizing the modernist aesthetic of motion and dissonance, the inter-Wars and post-World War Bengali literature took a crucial turn to re-link the notion of global with that of local by revolutionizing both. Jagadish Gupta holds the position of arguably the first Bengali novelist in terms of the frank treatment of sexuality and unfolding of, to use D.H. Lawrence’s phrase in _Women in Love_, “the endless depths of the unconsciousness”. With their narrative exposure of human instincts, and crude and violent lust for money and flesh, Gupta’s novels and short-stories function as key instances of a radical ethos, evolved in response to the oppositional forces of the brutal exercise of totalitarian power and the anti-imperial mass movements in the native-land and around the world during the first four decades of the twentieth century. Although produced mainly from outside the metropolitan centre of the Empire, Gupta’s writing contributed to a creative dialogue that also marked the most vibrating break in the cultural scenario of his contemporary world. To understand this dynamics we may refer to an evidence of the exchange of arguments among two seminal thinkers. The French Nobel laureate in literature and humanist Romain Rolland (1866-1944) wrote a series of works in the nineteen twenties and thirties that paved a way for the European reconstruct of the Indian spirituality: _Gandhi_ (1924), _Ramakrishna_ (1929) and _Vivekananda_ (1930). Rolland’s cultivation of optimism in the Oriental ‘spirit’ infuriated the father of modern psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud (1856-1939), who wrote to the French theorist that in a world people “continue to hate one another for minor differences and kill each other for petty gain” it is “hard enough to ensure the perpetuation of our species in the conflict between our instinctual nature and the demands made upon us by civilization”. Freud himself proceeded during the Second World War and Spanish Civil War to decipher the source of the “death drive” of human beings and fascist hatred of humanity. On the other hand, against the backdrop of thirties’ fascism the Bengali poet and critic Buddhadeva Bose (1908-1974) pointed out that an imperial state “targets its fiercest weapons at common (wo)men even at home striving for equality and liberation”. The fierce mechanism of authoritarian mentality and the most complicated release of liberating energy of common people under physical and psychological suppression become major literary themes at the hands of Bose and some of his associates, engaged in the re-constitution of Bengali world of letters in the late and post-Tagore period. Participating in the material and mental rifts of the late-colonial Bengal and claiming for itself an international identity, Bengali avant garde literature also decried the sentimental celebration of land as ‘mother’ and the image of sanctified ‘native’ in the nationalist discourse.

Buddhadeva Bose is generally considered as the spokesperson of a short-lived but hugely influential literary movement built around a magazine, named _Kallol_ (1923-1935). The writers of the “_Kallol Era_”, famously identified so in a book with the same title by Achintakumar Sengupta (1903-1976), include Jagadish Gupta along with Buddhadeva Bose, Premendra Mitra, Narendra Dev, Sailajananda Mukhopadhyay, Radharani Dutta, Nirupama Devi, Sudhidranath Ghosh, Pramatha Chaudhury, Surama Devi, Sarojkumari Devi, Pramathanath Bisi and many others. And, besides the _Kallol_, periodicals like_Kali Kalam_, _Parichoy_, _Dhupchaya_ also played significant roles in the formation of this movement, to which Gupta’s major literary outputs belong. The works of Kallol authors redefine Bengali literature by creating a geography of senses and sensualities, and focusing mainly on the uncanny parts and morbid insides of life of urban poor, rural subaltern and disintegrated middle-class, as these works employ experimentalism of the fin de siècle European literature and philosophy. Jagadish Gupta represents most of the typical features of this movement while remaining one of the most individual writers of his generation. This duality perhaps derives from his complex and unparalleled development as an artist which we would focus on in the next episode.