+++
author = "Dr Subhadeep Ray"
author_bio = ""
bangla = false
biography_image = ""
biography_image_webp = ""
chapter = true
date = 2021-11-25T18:30:00Z
description = ""
featured = false
image = ""
image_webp = ""
index = 3
next = false
previous = true
tags = []
title = "Episode 3: An Aesthetics of Desire and Discontent: Literary motives of Jagadish Gupta"

+++
In order to estimate Jagadish Gupta’s distinct contribution to the modern Bengali literature of the first half of the twentieth century, we need to remember that Gupta was ten years younger than the doyen of Bengali fiction, Saratchandra Chattopadhyay (1876-1938), and was at least fifteen years older than the literary artists associated with the _Kallol_ movement. Though Gupta was a regular contributor to two leading literary magazines, _Kallol_ and _Kali Kalam_, he cannot be easily grouped together with the younger generation of Bengali avant-garde authors of the late-nineteen twenties, thirties and forties. Major Bengali poet and critic, Achintya Kumar Sengupta (1903-1976), once commented that in spite of being an older artist, Gupta, in his works, was characterized by the energy and angst of youth. Gupta’s literary art can be, on the other hand, compared and contrasted with realistic novels and short-stories of Saratchandra Chattopadhyay. Both these authors set their writings against the backdrop of the late-colonial Bengali countryside. But, the physical and psychological attributes of the characters in Jagadish Gupta’s fiction sharply differ from Chattopadhyay’s emotional depiction of some intrinsic humanity that refuses to be altered under acute social pressures. A completely new structure of feeling is enforced by Gupta with a radical shift in the aesthetics of Bengali modern fiction from an engagement with heart to that with body, supported by a calculative brain. Led by organic instincts and desires, and manipulated by a profit-seeking and exploitative world, down-trodden men and women in Gupta’s narrative, do not have time to pay heed to moral and ethical considerations of their choice of action.

As suggested in the earlier episodes of this series, the literary world of Gupta was shaped by the socio-economic changes during the transfer of power from the Raj to the Republic through War, Famine, Partition, riots. The haunting spirit of this entire period on the common mass find a poetic expression in Jibanananda Das’s “1946-47” (first published in 1948):

Many, it’s true, must leave in breathless haste, yet

One or two can buy up, depriving the many,

House and household goods for auction –

Or things that are not for auction.

Usury pays in the world, but not for all;

Beatific bills of exchange in the hands of one or two.

Everything, even woman, is taken away

By the demands of such lofty people of the world.

(Translated by Shirshendu Chakrabarti in _A Certain Sense: Poems by Jibanananda Das_, edited by Sukanta Chaudhuri; Sahitya Akademi, 1998).

A grossly unpromising reality of the common mass being “tattered and blinded/ By famine, riot, misery, illiteracy” – to quote another phrase from the above poem by Das – is reflected on by Gupta’s fictional narrative that focuses on the conflict between the crudely self-centered individual subjects and an equally crude destiny.

The relationship that persists between (wo)man and fate, and between (wo)man and (wo)man is the relationship of revenge. In his introduction to the collection of Gupta’s short stories, Subir Raychaudhuri thus writes: “Gupta was not much convinced by the possibilities of social transformation. However, as an artist he is fully aware of the contradictory roles of the oppressor and the oppressed. … In this society even a good person is received with suspicion by fellow beings, because one cannot survive by his/her goodness. In order to survive one requires money, wealth and power, which cannot be obtained in any honest way” (_Jagadish Guptar Galpa_, Dey’s Pub., 1977). In the tale, “_Rati o Biroti_” (“Carnal Passion and Break”), the central character Ram spends his life by searching for his lost money, and he comes to the realization that the narratives of sin and goodness serve to deceive and deprive the foolish and scared ordinary folk. In “_Urmilar Mon_” (“The Mental World of Urmila”), when a young lady becomes a widow she accepts her fate, but when the same lady hears her childhood friend has lost her child, the former enjoys the tragedy of the latter. The dark world of human psychology in Gupta’s novels and short stories establishes him as the foremost ‘Freudian’ writer of the modern Bengali fiction. In this respect, Gupta has marked similarities with Manik Bandyopadhyay. According to Manabendra Bandyopadhyay, Siddhartha of Gupta’s novel _Asadhu Siddhartha_ (_Dishonest Siddhartha_) is the first anti-hero of Bengali literature. Siddhartha is fated to live a sinned life and there are two options life offers to him: either to commit suicide or to revolt against the surrounding world. Interestingly the same kind of theme is treated by Gupta’s contemporary novelist Prabhatkumar Mukhopadhyay in his novel _Ratnadwip_ (_The Island of Gems_) only to save the character of the cheat from ethical fall. Siddhartha, on the contrary, seems to be under no obligation to be honest to the world.

Rabindranath Tagore wrote a long review of Jagadish Gupta’s another major novel, _Laghu Guru_ (_Silly and Great_), in which he objects against the affected realism of Gupta’s narrative, which, in Tagore’s view, seems to distort surrounding reality in order to create sensational effects. The characters and events treated by Gupta had not been witnessed or met by Tagore. In his own humble reply, Gupta asserted that one could easily find the members of his literary world around the township of Bolpur – so close to Tagore’s Shantiniketan! By throwing light on the uncharted and unnoticed areas of colonized experience Jagadish Gupta inaugurates a new trend of literary sensibilities in Bengali literature.

Characterizing the modernist aesthetic of motion and dissonance, the inter-Wars and post-World War Bengali literature took a crucial turn to re-link the notion of global with that of local by revolutionizing both. Jagadish Gupta holds the position of arguably the first Bengali novelist in terms of the frank treatment of sexuality and unfolding of, to use D.H. Lawrence’s phrase in _Women in Love_, “the endless depths of the unconsciousness”. With their narrative exposure of human instincts, and crude and violent lust for money and flesh, Gupta’s novels and short-stories function as key instances of a radical ethos, evolved in response to the oppositional forces of the brutal exercise of totalitarian power and the anti-imperial mass movements in the native-land and around the world during the first four decades of the twentieth century. Although produced mainly from outside the metropolitan centre of the Empire, Gupta’s writing contributed to a creative dialogue that also marked the most vibrating break in the cultural scenario of his contemporary world. To understand this dynamics we may refer to an evidence of the exchange of arguments among two seminal thinkers. The French Nobel laureate in literature and humanist Romain Rolland (1866-1944) wrote a series of works in the nineteen twenties and thirties that paved a way for the European reconstruct of the Indian spirituality: _Gandhi_ (1924), _Ramakrishna_ (1929) and _Vivekananda_ (1930). Rolland’s cultivation of optimism in the Oriental ‘spirit’ infuriated the father of modern psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud (1856-1939), who wrote to the French theorist that in a world people “continue to hate one another for minor differences and kill each other for petty gain” it is “hard enough to ensure the perpetuation of our species in the conflict between our instinctual nature and the demands made upon us by civilization”. Freud himself proceeded during the Second World War and Spanish Civil War to decipher the source of the “death drive” of human beings and fascist hatred of humanity. On the other hand, against the backdrop of thirties’ fascism the Bengali poet and critic Buddhadeva Bose (1908-1974) pointed out that an imperial state “targets its fiercest weapons at common (wo)men even at home striving for equality and liberation”. The fierce mechanism of authoritarian mentality and the most complicated release of liberating energy of common people under physical and psychological suppression become major literary themes at the hands of Bose and some of his associates, engaged in the re-constitution of Bengali world of letters in the late and post-Tagore period. Participating in the material and mental rifts of the late-colonial Bengal and claiming for itself an international identity, Bengali avant garde literature also decried the sentimental celebration of land as ‘mother’ and the image of sanctified ‘native’ in the nationalist discourse.

Buddhadeva Bose is generally considered as the spokesperson of a short-lived but hugely influential literary movement built around a magazine, named _Kallol_ (1923-1935). The writers of the “_Kallol Era_”, famously identified so in a book with the same title by Achintakumar Sengupta (1903-1976), include Jagadish Gupta along with Buddhadeva Bose, Premendra Mitra, Narendra Dev, Sailajananda Mukhopadhyay, Radharani Dutta, Nirupama Devi, Sudhidranath Ghosh, Pramatha Chaudhury, Surama Devi, Sarojkumari Devi, Pramathanath Bisi and many others. And, besides the _Kallol_, periodicals like_Kali Kalam_, _Parichoy_, _Dhupchaya_ also played significant roles in the formation of this movement, to which Gupta’s major literary outputs belong. The works of Kallol authors redefine Bengali literature by creating a geography of senses and sensualities, and focusing mainly on the uncanny parts and morbid insides of life of urban poor, rural subaltern and disintegrated middle-class, as these works employ experimentalism of the fin de siècle European literature and philosophy. Jagadish Gupta represents most of the typical features of this movement while remaining one of the most individual writers of his generation. This duality perhaps derives from his complex and unparalleled development as an artist which we would focus on in the next episode.