+++
all_day_event = false
calendar_filename = "Calcutta Comparatists 1919 presents to you the 70th lecture of the CC1919 LECTURE SERIES. "
description = "Calcutta Comparatists 1919 presents to you the 70th lecture of the CC1919 LECTURE SERIES. "
disable_download = false
disable_link = false
event_end_date = 2021-04-06T08:30:00Z
event_start_date = 2021-04-06T06:30:00Z
image = "/images/whatsapp-image-2021-04-01-at-12-16-08-am.jpeg"
image_webp = "/images/whatsapp-image-2021-04-01-at-12-16-08-am.webp"
location = ""
meeting_link = "https://youtu.be/xwpXyDEnTSc"
tags = ["Cosmopolitanism", "World Literature"]
title = "Local cosmopolitanism: “Kesari” Balakrishna Pillai and the invention of world literature for Kerala c. 1930"
[[speakers]]
bio = "Mellon Chair in Indian Studies,\nDirector,\nCentre for Indian Studies in Africa,\nUniversity of the Witwatersrand."
speaker_image = "/images/dilip-menon.jpg"
speaker_image_webp = "/images/dilip-menon.webp"
speaker_name = "Prof. Dilip Menon"

+++
We are extremely happy to announce that Prof. Dilip Menon has kindly agreed to deliver an invited lecture in our forum on 6th April 2021.

It is not often that one man and his writings change forever the sensibilities of a people. In the decade of the 1930s, in the state of Kerala in southwestern India, A. Balakrishna Pillai (1889–1960), the erudite and politically committed editor of the Malayalam literary journal, Kesari, created a new literary aesthetic that veered the imagination of an entire generation of Malayalis towards European and world literature. It was as a critical nationalist that he imagined this seemingly paradoxical enterprise. The thirties were the high noon of Indian nationalism but Kesari rejected the dominant nationalist paradigm of the spiritual idealism of Gandhi. His first collection of essays evocatively titled Navalokam \[New World\], published in 1935, lamented the fact that individuals and institutions in south India were unaware of French, Russian, and other literature in European languages which were far more revolutionary and aesthetic than anything that English literature had to offer. He proceeded to imagine a Europe that in his eyes reflected a political sensibility committed to radical, egalitarian modernity. It was not the figure of a ‘hyperreal’ or ideal-type Europe (to use the current cant) that he summoned up and critically deployed against both the colonial violence of the British as well as the narrow certainties of nationalist politics. It was a recovery of Europe through particular literary figures and traditions that embodied a search for better literature and a more just future. His essays spoke about Marcel Proust, Honore de Balzac, Gustave Flaubert, and Guy de Maupassant from France; Henrik Ibsen from Scandinavia; the Italian and Japanese Futurists; and Mayakovsky from Russia among others across Europe and Asia. Kesari enlisted them as compatriots in the creation of a canon that would arouse Malayalam literature from its classical stupor to the recognition of everyday realities and injustices.

This talk will explore the meaning of this local cosmopolitanism as Pillai fashioned and perhaps continued an idea of an always already connected world that transcended the geographies generated by colonialism and nationalism. Europe, indeed the world, became the provinces of Kerala.

For further updates about this session please subscribe to our official YouTube channel.